Cubism, although it began to affect German expressionism only in the later paintings of Marc, Macke, and Lyonel Feininger, was implicit in Italian futurist painting and sculpture at the very birth of the movement. Futurism was first of all a literary concept, born in the mind of the poet and propagandist Filippo Tommaso Marinetti in 1908, and propagated in a series of manifestos in 1909, 19 10, and subsequently. Essentially a Milanese movement, it began as a rebellion of young intellectuals against the cultural torpor into which Italy had sunk during the nineteenth century; and, as so frequently happens in such movements, its manifestos were initially intent on what they had to destroy. The first manifesto demanded - the destruction of the libraries, the museums, the academies, and the cities of the past that were themselves mausoleums. It extolled the beauties of revolution, of war, of the speed and dynamism of modern technology: “ a roaring motorcar, which looks as though funning on shrapnel, is more beautiful than the Victory of Samothrace.” Much of the spirit of futurism reflected the flamboyant personality of Marinetti himself; and he in turn was an extreme case of the indignation that his generation felt over the cultural and political decline of Italy. The futurism of Marinetti and his followers was rooted in the philosophies of Henri Bergson and Friedrich Nietzsche and in the prevalent atmosphere of anarchism. It was attacking the ills of a lopsided aristocratic and bourgeois society; in the field of politics it unfortunately became a pillar of Italian fascism.@Early in 1909 the pa inters Umberto Boccioni, Carlo Carra, and Luigi Russolo joined with Marinetti. Later they were also joined by Gino Severini, who had been working in Paris since 1906, and Giacomo Balla. The group drew up its own manifesto in 1910. This again attacked the museums, the libraries, and the academies, and paid homage to the idea of simultaneity of vision, metamorphosis, and of motion that constantly multiplied the moving object. Particular emphasis was given to the unification of the painted object and environment, so that no clear distinction could be drawn between the two. The targets of the futurists included all forms of imitation, concepts of harmony and good taste, all art critics, all traditional subjects, tonal painting, and even that perennial staple , the painted nude.@ At this point, the paintings of the futurists had little in common and demonstrated no startling originality. Many of their ideas still came from the unified color patterns of the impressionists and even more explicitly from the divisionist techniques of the neo-impressionists. But unlike impressionism, post-impressionism, fauvism, and cubism, all of which were generated by a steady interaction of theory and practice, futurism emerged as a full-blown theory based on and anticipated by literary theories; the artists then set themselves to produce paintings that illustrated the theory. This was really a sort of academy of the avant-garde; and it is remarkable that so substantial a number of effective and, at times, original works should have been produced by it. The futurists were passionately concerned with the problem of establishing an empathic identity between the spectator and the painting, “putting the spectator in the center of the picture .” In this they were close to the German expressionists, as noted previously. And although they absorbed / the technical vocabulary of cubism, their aim was not formal analysis but direct appeal to the emotions.    @  The art of the futurists extolled metropolitan life and modern industry. This did not result in a machine aesthetic in the manner of Leger, since they were concerned with unrestrained expression of individual ideals, with mystical revelation achieved through an orgiastic involvement in total action. Despite their identity of purpose, the art of the futurists cannot be considered a unified style like impressionism or cubism. Balla, the oldest of the group and the teacher of Severini and Boccioni, early in the century was painting realistic pictures with social implications. He then became a leading Italian exponent or neo-impressionist divisionism, and in this context most strongly influenced the younger futurists.  Balla’s painting The Street Light-Study of Light is one of the earliest examples of pure futurism. Using V-shaped brush strokes of complementary colors radiating from the central source of the lamp, he created an optical illusion of light rays translated into dazzling colors so intense that their vibration becomes painful to the eye. Carlo Carra, in his Funeral of the Anarchist Galli, 1910-11, uses violent reds and blacks organized in acute diagonals of figure movement to re-create the wild riot that erupted on that occasion. Whereas in the Balla work a divisionist technique was used in creation of emotional color impact, in Carra’s Funeral we remainedn conscious of a cubist structure translated into action. Boccioni, perhaps their most talented of the futurists, produced his first important futurist painting in Riot in the Gallery, 1909, a work that combines some of the elements of Balla’s Street Light and Carra’s Funeral. Color is used in a divisionist manner and, combined with the angular, linear surging of the mob, creates a picture of wild excitement. It resolves itself, however, into a decorative pattern from which nothing very serious can ensue. This work was preparatory to one of his most monumental efforts, The City Rises, 1910-11, in which he sought his first “great synthesis of labor, light, and movement.” In this painting, which is dominated by the large, surging figure of the foreground horse before which the human figures fall like ninepins, he made one of the first major statements of the qualities of violent action, speed, the disintegration of solid objects by light, and their reintegration into the totality of the picture by the very same light. Such a statement represents one aspect of the futurist credo: the dynamism of work, of labor, in modern industrial society, with sheer power symbolized by rearing, thundering horses. Another aspect appears in the same artist’s painting The Laugh (fig. 368) , in which the scene is a restaurant or night club with all the paraphernalia of gay dissipation rendered in garish colors. The type of scene represented here and in Severini’s night-club paintings was not done in condemnation; rather, the gaiety, the color, and the wild tempo of pleasure and dissipation were shown as part of the dynamism of the new world the futurists were seeking. Their revolt was against the deadly dullness of late nineteenth-century bourgeois morality. Of the group, Luigi Russolo (1885-194 7) was perhaps the least original as an artist but one of the strongest theoreticians. In the Solidity of Fog, he translates the light radiating from the darkened sun through the dense fog into circles of emanation so tangible that they segment the dark figures of the foreground and absorb them into the rhythm of light and atmosphere. Russolo became so much interested in the possibilities of a futurist music that for a number of years he gave up painting in order to devote his time to the development of his noise organs, with which he was able to produce a startling range of both commonplace and extraordinary sounds. This music was an ancestor of the electronic music of today.@The futurist exhibition in Milan in May 1911 was the first of their efforts to make their theories concrete. Intoxicated by this initial effort, they then sought, through the agency of Marinetti, to invade the great art world of Paris. In the fall of 1911 Carra and Boccioni visited Paris in order to study the latest manifestations before attempting an exhibition there. What they learned is evident in the repainted version of Boccioni’s Farewells, 1911 (fig. 369), which is part of his triptych States of Mind. Within the vibrating, curving pattern he introduced a cubist structure of interwoven facets that sets up a tension of forces, of linear movement. Space is constricted and controlled; the effect is of compression rather than indefinite expansion. Boccioni even added the shock of a literal, realistic collage-like element in the scrupulously rendered numbers on the cab of the dissolving engine. It will be recalled that Braque, earlier in the year, and Picasso, toward the end of the year, introduced lettering and numbers into their analytical cubist works. The exhibition of the futurists, held in February 19 J 2 at the gallery of Bernheim-Jeune in Paris, was widely noticed and reviewed favorably by Apollinaire himself. It later circulated to London, Berlin, Brussels, The Hague, Amsterdam, and Munich. Within the year, from being an essentially provincial movement in Italy, futurism suddenly became a significant part of international experimental art.@GIACOMO BALLA (1871-1958) Balla, who was older than the other four members of the group, worked in Rome rather than in Milan. He pursued his own distinctive experiments, partic1:1Iarly in rendering motion through simultaneous views of many aspects of objects. His Dynamism of a Dog on a Leash, with its multiplication of arms and legs, has become one of the familiar and delightful creations of futurist simultaneity. The little terrier scurries along on short legs accelerated and multiplied to the point where they almost turn into wheels.@This device for suggesting rapid motion or physical activity later became a clichè of the comic strips and animated cartoons. The transformation of figures and objects into a moving pattern of color and line is seen again in his Flight of the Swifts, 1913, a bold interplay of rectilinear and curvilinear elements, both in their entirety and fragmented. The curving horizontal of the swifts’ rapid flight contrasts with the zigzag organization of wings and feathers, and both gain force from the off-vertical lines that stand up like poles. The birds are literal and non-literal but the sense of flight is striking. Balla was a lyrical painter who achieved his effects without the noise and violence of some of his colleagues. GINO SEVERIN! (1883- 1966),@CARLO CARRA (1881-1966)@Gino Severini, living in Paris, was for several years more closely associated with the growth of cubism than the other futurists. His approach to futurism is summarized in Dynamic Hieroglyph of the Bal Tabari, a gay and amusing distillation of Paris night life. The basis of the composition lies in cubist faceting put into rapid motion within large, swinging curves. The brightly .dressed chorus girls, the throaty chanteuse, the top-hatted, monocled patron, the waiters, the food, the wine, the flags, the carnival atmosphere are all presented in a spirit of delight. This work is a tour de force involving almost every device of cubist painting and collage: not only the color shapes that are contained in the cubist grid, but elements of sculptural modeling that create effects of advancing volumes; the carefully lettered words, “Valse”, “Polka” “Bowling”; and the sequins of the girls’ costumes added as collage. The color has impressionist freshness, its arbitrary distribution fauve boldness. Many areas and objects are mechanized and finely stippled in a neo-impressionist manner. Severini even included one or two passages of literal representation, such as the minuscule Arab horseman and the tiny but explicit nude riding a large pair of scissors.@The sense of fragmented but still dominating reality that persisted in Severini’s cubist paintings between 1912 and 1914 found its most logical expression in a series of works involving transportation, which began in 1912 with studies of the Paris Metro. With the coming of the war, the theme of the train flashing through a cubist landscape began to intrigue him. Red Cross Train, 1914 (fig. 371), is a stylization of motion, much more deliberate in its tempo than the Bal Tabarin. The telescoped, but clearly recognizable train, with regular balloons of smoke billowing forth, cuts across the middle distance of large, handsome planes of strong color that intersect the train and absorb it into the total pattern. The divisionist brush stroke is used in the color areas, and the total effect is static rather than dynamic, and surprisingly abstract in feeling. Perhaps the most significant development in Severini’s painting during those two years was a movement toward total abstraction stemming from the influence of Delaunay. In Spherical Expansion of Light, Severini organized what might be called a futurist abstract pattern of triangles and curves, built up of divisionist brush strokes.@Carlo Carra, from 1912, was moving steadily toward an orthodox version of cubism that had little relation to the ideals of speed and dynamism of the futurist manifestos. He returned to the nude, a subject that led him toward a form of massive, sculptural modeling (Simultaneity, Woman on a Balcony, 1912-13; fig. 372). It was only a short step from this work to the metaphysical painting of Giorgio de Chirico, which Carra began to adopt about 1916. In the collage painting Patriotic Celebration (Free Word Painting), Carra followed Marinetti’s invention of “free words,” which were to supersede “free verse” and, through their visual associations, to affect and stimulate the spirit and imagination directly, without the intervention of reason. Again, the futurists anticipated tendencies that were not to become dominant until almost half a century later.@FUTURIST @SCULPTURE:@UMBERTO BOCCIONI (1882-1916)@Umberto Boccioni’s career, cut short in 1916, demonstrated greater consistency than that of most of his fellow futurists. For a time he, like other futurists, played back and forth between precise realism and a cubist-futurist structure of transparent color planes. His Dynamism of a Cyclist (fig. 373) illustrates a move toward abstraction almost as complete as Severini’s, with the difference that Boccioni faithfully maintained a suggestiveness of abstract shapes, to the point where they resemble Kandinsky’s more ordered abstraction of the same moment. But the greatest contribution of Boccioni during the last few years of his life was the creation of futurist sculpture. Taking off from the impressionist sculptures of Medardo Rosso (see figs. 102, I 03) -perhaps the only other Italian sculptor of stature working in the early years of the twentieth century- Boccioni sought to assimilate the figure or object to the surrounding environment in the manner of his paintings. This he did first by attacking the age-old problem of how to organize three-dimensional, intangible space so that it is expressed as fully as solid mass. In his Technical Manifesto of Futurist Sculpture, 1912, he began with the customary attack on all academic tradition. The attack became specific and virulent on the subject of the nude, which still dominated the work not only of the traditionalists but even of the leading progressive sculptors Rodin, Bourdelle, and Maillol. In Rosso’s impressionist sculpture and contemporary themes Boccioni found the most exciting innovations for sculpture; yet he recognized that, in his concern for the transitory moment, Rosso was bound to the subject in nature in the same way as the impressionist painters.@Boccioni, on the other hand, sought for eternal values in sculpture-”the style of movement” and “sculpture as environment.” “Absolute and complete abolition of definite lines and closed sculpture. We break open the figure and enclose it in environment.” He reaffirmed the sculptor’s right to use any form of distortion or fragmentation of figure or object, and insisted on the use of every kind of material-”glass, wood, cardboard, iron, cement, horsehair, leather, cloth, mirrors, electric lights, etc., etc.”@The sculpture manifesto was even more important than the painting manifestos in the degree that it prophesied the development of constructivist sculpture, Dada and surrealist assemblage, sculpture as literal motion, and even the environments of pop sculptors of the 1960s. Boccioni did not mention Picasso’s 1909 cubist head or Archipenko’s or Duchamp-Villon’s first cubist experiments, and he may not have been aware of these. The program he was proposing, however, went beyond anything envisaged in these early and tentative efforts at cubist sculpture. Picasso’s first cubist constructions date from 1912-13, and the first thorough exploration of collage by Picasso and Braque, from 1912. Yet it is difficult to conceive of Boccioni’s early futurist portrait The Mother (Anti-Graceful, fig. 374), without the precedent of Picasso’s 1909 Head of Fernande Olivier (see fig. 205). The forms are more fluid, the concentration on characterization more explicit, but the fragmentation of masses is closely comparable. In total, the Boccioni portrait seems to lie somewhere between Picasso’s cubist sculptural faceting of surface and Rosso’s impressionist diffusion of surface. On the other hand, the Development of a Bottle in Space (fig. 375), although cast in bronze, constituted an enlargement of the tradition for the analysis of sculptural space. The bottle is stripped open, unwound, and integrated with an environmental base that makes of the homely object, only fifteen inches high, the model of a vast monument of three-dimensional masses existing totally in surrounding three-dimensional space. More ambitious, though less successful as sculptural environments, were the artist’s two destroyed works of 1912, Fusion of a Head and a Window and Head & House & Light, in which he attempted a literal fusion of figure and architectural elements, using all sorts of materials. These noble experiments, although disastrous in execution, were nevertheless prophetic prototypes of Dada and Surrealist assemblages and pop art environments.@Boccioni’s most impressive sculpture, the Unique Forms of Continuity in Space, was also his most sculpturally traditional and the one most specifically related to his paintings. The striding figure, made up of fluttering, curving planes of bronze, moves essentially in two dimensions, like a translation of his painted figures into relief. In effect, it is comparable with the Victory of Samothrace, with her wings and draperies flowing out behind her, rather than like the total sculptural environment for which he pleaded in his own sculptural manifesto.@FUTURIST ARCHITECTURE:@ANTONIO SANT’ELIA (1888-1916)@In the First Free Futurist Exhibition, held in Rome in 1914, a number of younger artists-Giorgio Morandi, Mario Sironi, Enrico Prampolini, and others-joined with the original five. The most interesting new recruit was the young architect Antonio Sant’Elia, who drew up his own Manifesto of Futurist Architecture, probably with the ever-present assistance of Marinetti. Like Toni Garnier in his plans for the Industrial City, Sant’Elia conceived of cities built of the newest materials, in terms of the needs of modern man, and as expressions of the dynamism of the modern spirit. His ideas, largely monumental visions, remained on the drawing board. Today they have the dated appearance of a classical pseudo-modernism, but his Manifesto is perhaps his greatest achievement, for it was an important contribution to the development of modern architecture in Europe. However, in some of his daring engineering concepts there is a suggestion of the magnificent achievements of Pier Luigi Nervi, the Italian master and one of the world’s masters of structural engineering.@World War I wrote finis to the first and only significant stage of Italian futurism, although many of the more propagandist ideas and slogans were integrated into the rising tide of fascism and used for political and social ends. The futurists themselves, still Jed by Marinetti, were drawn more and more into specific war propaganda. Carra devised the hysterical if fascinating propaganda collage. Using radiations of colors and Jines and verbal symbols, he extolled the king and the army, and simulated visually the noises of sirens and mobs. Boccioni, in the Cavalry Charge, extolled his subject in jagged diagonals of lances, and Severini followed his more temperate series of Red Cross Trains with an Armored Train, 1915, a pictorial monument to mechanized warfare.